Good morning!
Alright.
Wow, the home stretch, the last day.
Well, as you can see, again,
I always keep saying this, but Mac OS X,
Carbon, the theme of this week.
We are so excited about how
much progress we've made,
and how much progress we've
made helping you get on the
platform as fast as possible.
This session about Carbon Enhancements
II to the High Level Toolbox is going
to go further into depth about ways
that your process of carbonizing
your application is affected.
It's really good stuff to know,
so without delay,
I'm just going to bring up Pete Gontier
from the High Level Toolbox team.
Please welcome Pete.
So, I hope you had a chance to check out
the Carbon Enhancements I session.
This is going to be a session
very similar in theme.
We've been doing so much work on,
not only on Aqua,
but on the toolbox in general,
that we had to do two
sessions to fit it all in.
This session will have basically the
same structure as the last session.
We're going to do a big section
on architectural changes,
which are things that you pretty much
have to do in order to come up on Carbon.
And the ones that we'll talk
about in this session are the
fact that you can no longer draw
directly the Window Manager Port,
There's a small change to the way control
indicator action procedures are called.
There are some changes you will need to
make to control and window definitions.
Not anything too radical.
There is a change in the way you
need to instantiate custom control
window and other definitions.
And then of course there are some new
dialog item list accessors that you'll
want to use because of dialog opacity.
Then we'll move on to the stuff
that you don't have to do,
but the stuff that you'll probably want
to do as soon as you hear about it.
There's Unicode support
in the toolbox everywhere.
We've added drag and drop
support for controls.
Then we've added the usual collection
of new Control Manager APIs.
And then finally,
we'll talk a little bit about
Carbon Enhancments in the Toolbox.
Not too much,
because there were two whole
sessions on Carbon events,
Sessions 121 and 122,
and those are already passed,
but I wanted to mention them
just to emphasize the fact that
if you get a chance to pull
down webcasts or videotapes,
you definitely should
prioritize 121 and 122,
because Carbon events
are really important.
So let's talk about the
Window Manager Port.
Mac OS X is, as you've heard,
a preemptive operating system,
and the screen buffer is basically
a huge global shared resource.
And for performance reasons,
we have not yet solved the
problem of letting you draw
to it in the general case.
It would be a mess if we didn't
control the access to it,
and controlling the access to it is
actually more difficult than it sounds.
So we're still working on that issue.
Now you may find through experimentation
that you actually can kind of sort
of draw to what seems to be the
Window Manager Port under DP4.
And hopefully that will only happen
by accident because you don't,
definitely don't want to have
code that expects to draw to the
Window Manager Port on purpose
because soon after DP4 we're going
to be making some changes that
will make it basically impossible.
But the news isn't all bad.
We have provided a few replacement
services that cover the common cases
that most people needed to draw
to the Window Manager Port for.
The first of those cases
is custom window dragging.
Instead of rolling your
own window dragging code,
we really need you to use the
DragWindow system call now.
It's basically,
not only do you get live dragging,
which is a nice, whizzy effect for users,
but it's the, excuse me,
DragWindow is now sufficiently
customizable that you really shouldn't
have any problem figuring out how to
get the constraining and gridding and
the other custom behavior that you need.
And this is part of the
whole Carbon Events thing.
Basically,
we send you Carbon Events during
window dragging,
and you can decide what to do with them.
We send you such things as the
rectangle the window would be
in if you were to not change it,
and then you have the choice
of changing it or not,
so that you get the little
gridding effect that you need.
I believe in the Carbon Events session
there was a demo where we showed sort of
docking behavior during window dragging,
where windows were docked
against the edge of a screen
and docked against each other.
And I guess I should also point out
that dragWindow now supports layering
in the sense that the outline that's
dragged around the-- excuse me,
the window that's dragged around the
screen is clipped according to the
windows that are actually in front of it,
so you don't have to override
dragWindow just to make it look decent.
The next case is Grow Window.
Basically, if you use the system's
Grow Window service,
that enables us to provide live growing,
which is basically the window contents
redraw as the user grows the window.
So if the window becomes bigger,
the image in the window
can be drawn by the system,
more or less interactively.
And of course,
there are the usual ways to
customize window growing,
again, mostly based on Carbon events.
There's one method you can use by
overwriting a window definition message,
and that is, of course,
the get_grow_image_region message.
And the reason we mention this,
even though it's not a
Carbon Events sort of facility,
is that it's basically your only option
if you need to do this for CarbonLib 102,
or 102 through 104, I guess I should say.
[Transcript missing]
And then of course the best
method would be to override the
window size change Carbon event.
And the difference there is that one
of these messages hands you a region
and one of them hands you a rectangle.
So if you really, really,
really need to change the visual
appearance of the growing process,
then you're probably going to get
stuck overriding the region version.
But it's much better if you stick with
the rectangle version because I believe
if you override the region version that
prevents us from doing the live growing.
So some developers were
rolling their own dragging,
and it would draw into
the Window Manager Port.
And the primary reason they were
rolling their own dragging was that the
drag manager wasn't versatile enough.
So what we did was we added a function,
excuse me, an API to change an arbitrary
drag reference so that you can
turn off the zoom back animation
for an unsuccessful drag.
And of course this API,
Change Drag Behaviors,
can expand in the future for us to
add more flags that you can turn
on or off on a drag-by-drag basis.
And basically the way you
would use this facility is you
would create a drag reference,
just like you would for any other
interaction with the drag manager,
and turn off its zoom back animation,
and then either add no flavors
and maintain all the state
within your application,
or add some flavors that tell you what
to do and mark them all sender-only
flavors so that you don't get windows
in other applications highlighting it
as if they're going to accept the drag.
And so, the way we sort of,
the usage scenario that we sort
of entertained was people who
need to drag out of a window,
some object out of a window,
and then let the user more or less
drop it in the middle of nowhere
and have something appear there
where there used to be nothing.
So, the last scenario we have a good
explanation for is people who need
to sample the pixels on the screen.
And of course,
you can still sample pixels right
out of your own windows because
we have a per window buffer
that you'll be sampling out of.
The problem case is sampling pixels
that are outside any of your windows.
In order to work well with the
preemptive window manager that
underlies the Carbon window manager,
we have a very window-centric outlook,
and we're working on
ways to overcome that.
But basically, let me think here.
Basically,
what we think is going to happen is
that there will probably never be
a platform independent way to peek
at pixels outside of your windows.
And I guess I'll talk a little bit
more about that on the next slide.
But once again,
we have the caveat of there are
things that work in DP4 that
you can discover on your own.
And in this case,
you can create a port and then sort
of look at its Pixmap handle and
sample pixels out of it that way.
And that's one of those things that
very soon after DP4 we're going to
change so that it doesn't work anymore.
And then the final thing to keep in mind,
of course, is rather than grabbing
video RAM directly,
you should definitely use copy
bits for a number of reasons.
So the plain old drawing case
is the most general case,
and of course there's not a lot of
sort of semantic opportunity for us to
provide other services when you consider
the problem in such a general way.
Sometimes developers need to
draw directly to the screen,
or sometimes developers
just because they want to
take over the whole screen.
And of course you can still do that,
but you've got to do a little work ahead
of time in order to make that happen.
The basic idea is to create a
window that covers the whole screen.
And you can do that on your
own by hiding the menu bar,
or you can do that by asking QuickTime or
GamesProcess to do it for you.
And I sort of tend towards
asking QuickTime or GamesProcess
to take care of it for you,
because they also know about things
like hiding the control strip.
And I imagine that eventually they'll
be wired up to hide the dock as well,
so you don't have to worry
about all those extra details.
Um, and then of course the obvious
alternative is to start thinking about,
uh, ways to provide the same
functionality that your application
was providing by drawing directly
to the screen in some other way.
And we realize that probably
involves thinking about a
little bit of a redesign.
Um...
But there's not really an
alternative we have to present
today to solve that problem.
And as I said,
there may eventually be some kind of
platform-dependent way to do this.
Right now there's not,
but we expect there probably won't
be a platform-independent way.
We're still looking at this problem,
but we're not able to commit
to anything right now.
So, control indicator action procedures
have changed a little bit,
and it all has to do with performance.
It used to be the case that the
control manager would call your
control indicator action procedure
basically as fast as it could.
And so if your proc needed idle time,
all you had to do was wait for
some of these excessive calls,
and call movies task,
or whatever else it was that
you needed to call at idle time.
And in order to provide more
blocking behavior to allow other
processes to have more processor,
the Control Manager will now only call
your Control Indicator Action proc
when the mouse actually moves.
So if you need idle time at this time,
you should install a timer.
And again, the Carbon Events session
went into detail about timers.
But basically,
a timer is a callback that gets called
at various times by the toolbox.
And one of those times is during the,
during control drag tracking,
or I should say, control tracking.
And you can pretty much do whatever
you like inside that timer.
It's not a sort of a time
manager sort of situation where
you're at quasi-interrupt time.
So definitely look at adopting
timers in order to get idle
time during control tracking.
So, some of the definition functions in
the toolbox are changing a little bit.
For the most part,
you're probably not going to
notice a whole lot of difference.
We've done a fair amount of work
building compatibility shims
into the Control Manager and the
Window Manager so that old control
definitions continue to work,
even though, in general,
definitions are Carbon event driven now.
You can now write a Carbon event
driven control definition
or a window definition,
but you don't absolutely have to.
And, of course, you can't if you need to
ship onto CarbonLib 104.
Control definitions now
take an initialized message,
and the initialized message,
one of the parameters to
the initialized message is a
Collection Manager collection.
And this sort of replaces all
of the nasty overriding that you
might have had to do in the past.
You can basically associate data with
tags in a collection manager collection,
and then the control definition can
pull the data out of that collection,
and the tags will actually make
sense instead of being the minimum
and the maximum and the refcon,
and they really mean something else.
Control initialization messages
also can return an OS status
so that if something goes wrong
during the creation of the control,
the definition can actually
report what went wrong instead
of just mindlessly fail.
And this will allow, ultimately,
the application to figure out, okay,
not only did something go wrong,
but here's a hint as to what went wrong,
so maybe you can work around it
or present an error to the user
and let the user work around it.
The region calculation messages for
control definitions have a long,
nasty history.
For a number of years they were
what we would call 32-bit dirty,
in that they sort of overrode
some pointer values and set
some flags in the high bits.
We used to, for compatibility,
preserve support for those
messages in certain cases,
but in Carbon it just doesn't
make any sense anymore.
So we've gotten rid of those
control region messages.
What we'd like you to respond to instead
now is a message called "Get Region,"
which has been around for a while.
It's basically a query to you
to provide a particular region,
and then the control manager decides
how to associate that region.
that region with your control.
With window definitions,
the story is pretty much the same.
We have a Carbon event driven
model for window definitions with a
compatibility shim for old messages.
And there are some changes
to the old messages as well.
There's also,
there's a window message get region,
which is, works pretty much the same.
We ask you for a specific part of
the window and you return to us a
region and then we decide how to
associate that region with the window.
WCalcRegions is pretty
much gone away because it,
well, it was not only not,
it was not only insufficiently versatile,
but basically required you to poke
around inside the window record.
And since we want the
window record to be opaque,
even to window definitions,
that simply wasn't a
workable model anymore.
And then of course, as I said,
there's no drawing into
the Window Manager Port.
You would expect,
if anything would draw directly
into the Window Manager Port,
it would be a window definition.
But we can't even allow
it for window definitions.
So what we've done is we've
made sure that when your
window definition is called,
the current port is already set
up to something it can draw into.
So you don't need to explicitly
get the Window Manager Port.
You can just assume that the port
is set correctly when you're called.
So even if you don't write
a custom control definition,
you still often need to instantiate them.
And basically, we've added some functions
which allow you to more easily
create custom toolbox objects.
And they're basically analogs between
the old classic APIs and the new APIs.
You're not required to use
the new APIs in all cases.
The old APIs are still there,
but for the custom definition case,
you probably want to use the new APIs.
[Transcript missing]
And it is definitely the case that
putting control definitions and resources
is no longer the right thing to do.
However, that doesn't mean you have to
throw out all of your client code.
Basically, we have a map which maps your
old resource IDs ultimately to
control definition functions.
So if you have a CNTL resource,
for example,
which specifies that control definition,
excuse me,
which specifies control proc ID 2064,
that ultimately maps to control
definition resource ID of 129.
And then the Control Manager has a map
that knows to map 129 to your function,
or actually to your control def spec.
And I call this a sort of a virtual
resource ID because the CNTL resource
thinks there's a control definition
which has a certain resource ID,
but in fact that control definition
doesn't exist as a resource,
it only exists as a map entry.
And the Control Manager knows
that when somebody asks for that
control definition resource ID,
It should relate it back
to your control def spec,
which you registered earlier.
So here's the function you use
to register a control definition.
Excuse me.
Yes, okay, at the bottom of the screen.
Let's just start with the beginning.
Basically,
when you register a control definition,
you not only provide a control def spec,
and a C def, or I should say a virtual
C def resource ID,
but you also provide a callback which
allows you to translate the fields that
were in the CNTL resource into either,
excuse me, into a collection so that
the control definition,
when its initialized message gets called,
it can extract parameters from the
collection in a tagged format instead
of knowing about all those weird,
overridden,
semantically confusing parameters
that you used to have to deal with.
And that mechanism is obviously
still needs to be there because
CNTL resources are in a certain
format and they have certain fields,
and we can't really make that go away.
So at some level,
you do have to know that, for example,
maximum and minimum fields
really mean something else.
But at least your control definition
doesn't really have to know.
And if you play your cards right,
your client code, for the most part,
doesn't have to know.
So yet another instance in the
series of toolbox object opacity
is that dialog item lists are,
of course, opaque.
And when we analyzed what
kind of problems that was
going to cause developers,
we found a couple of cases where
developers were actually pulling
individual items out of a dialog
item list or inserting new
ones into a dialog item list.
And so we've got now two APIs which
allow you to do this in a controlled,
supportable way.
And I guess the only sort of
non-obvious part of these APIs is
the second dialog item index
parameter to remove dialog items.
You're not forced to just remove one,
you can remove two or three in the
middle of the list if you feel like it.
Now we're getting into the section
of stuff that you may want to
do once you find out about it.
Basically, all the toolbox objects
now support UniCode,
and they support it not only in the APIs,
but also internally.
We still have the Pascal String APIs,
but basically what they do
is create a CF StringRef,
which is the object in core foundation
which supports UniCode as well as
several other encodings internally.
And then we, from there on,
the string stays CFString forever.
If you use CFString APIs,
you can pretty much be guaranteed
that if you-- the string that you
set into a control will come back
with 100% round-trip fidelity.
If you use the Pascal String APIs,
then we may or may not be
forced to do some conversion,
and you might lose a
little bit of fidelity.
So that's one reason you might
want to adopt the CFString APIs.
There's no, you know,
there's no sort of--
There's no requirement
that you adopt them,
but over the long run it's
probably in your best interest.
Internally,
we're working with CFString completely,
so we're not just sort of paying
lip service to the Unicode thing.
It's really down into
the core of the toolbox.
Finally, I want to talk about
CFStringRef semantics just
a little bit in brief.
Core Foundation introduces this new
concept of retain-release semantics,
and we of course support those.
And what that means is, in some cases,
we will not actually make a copy of
the string from the toolbox object.
We may, effectively,
increment the ref count of
that string instead of making
an actual byte copy of it.
And basically, you don't need to worry
too much about that,
except that we wanted to bring
it up to point out that that is,
in some cases, will be a performance win.
And you should probably read up
on CFStringRef and retain-release
semantics to understand that fully.
Now, in appearance, I think in Mac OS 8,
we introduced a new API to
deactivate a control.
But usually when developers
need to disable a control,
they resort to highlight control,
which is another one of these
functions with overloaded semantics.
So now we've introduced a function
called disable-- an explicit
function we call disable control.
And not only is there sort of a semantic
cleanup associated with this control,
but it allows us to do some
things in Aqua which we weren't
really able to do before.
Basically under Platinum,
a disabled control looks pretty
much like a deactivated control,
but under Aqua,
they look a little bit different.
I don't know if you can read,
maybe you can, the labels under each
of these button images.
So I'll just read them
out so we're clear.
The one on the far left is active.
Meaning it's basically in the
frontmost window and the user
expects to interact with,
excuse me, it's in a window that the
user expects to interact with,
but it's disabled.
The second one over from the
left is active and enabled,
so it's not only in a window the
user expects to interact with,
but that button actually
responds to clicks.
The third one over from
the left is inactive,
meaning it's probably
in a background window,
and it's disabled,
so it's sort of the most colorless.
And then the one on the right
is inactive and enabled,
and that just means it's
in some background window,
but if it were in a foreground window,
it would be clickable.
Now, we've added some contextual menu
manager support to controls.
And basically that support is intended
to be provided by the control definition.
So the control definition is
in the best position to know
what contextual menu to provide.
So we let it provide one.
And basically,
The way that the application level
client code works is you call
handle control contextual menu
click and it will query the control
definition to find out whether it
wants to provide a contextual menu.
If it doesn't want to
provide a contextual menu,
it will, excuse me,
the control manager will ultimately set
the menu displayed parameter to false.
And then you can test that after calling
handle control contextual menu click.
And if it is false,
then it means if your application
knows something about that
control or the enclosing window
or something along those lines,
then it can provide its
own contextual menu.
We've added control, excuse me,
we've added drag and drop
support to the control manager.
We've got a few slides on this because
it's a pretty comprehensive support.
Now, the first point here where it says,
by default, controls do not track drags,
basically what that means is
there are some controls which
support drag and drop inherently,
and that support does not change.
But you can tell an
individual control whether,
regardless of whether it
supports drag and drop,
you can tell it whether it should or not,
so it's really up to you.
Some controls will call
Set Control Drag Tracking Enabled
on themselves as they're created.
The only control that does this right
now is the Data Browser control.
And I believe there's a way to
specify that it not do that.
But in any case, you can turn it off.
And of course there are APIs to
enable or disable the capability.
And I think they're
pretty straightforward.
There's a setter and
a getter and there's,
um...
Not really much confusion there.
So the way drag tracking works is,
or at least in one of the cases,
is you install your normal
drag tracking handlers,
and while drag tracking is occurring,
your application needs to maintain
state so that it knows which of the drag
tracking messages to pass to the control.
And, of course,
as the mouse enters a control,
you send it the enter control message,
and as the mouse is moving
around within the control,
you send it the tracking
in control message,
and I'm guessing you can figure out
what the leave control message is for.
But anyway,
the important message here is that
your app needs to maintain the
state during drag tracking so that
controls are given the right clues
to draw the user feedback correctly.
And of course, when you receive,
or when the user releases the mouse
and the drag manager tells you
that the user is intending to drop,
you basically pass the drag reference
off to the control definition.
It looks at the drag reference,
figures out what data it cares about
and what data it doesn't care about,
and then incorporates that
information into the control.
And in a way, this is sort of like
calling set control data,
except that you get to pass
many different flavors,
perhaps many different items.
So it's sort of like,
it's almost like a container
being shipped off to the control,
and the control incorporates
whatever data it cares about.
Now there's a much easier
way to get support for drag
and drop in your application,
and basically it involves telling the
control manager for a given window,
just handle tracking.
You don't need to install
tracking handlers.
You don't need to install drop handlers.
Everything is taken care
of for you automatically.
And you give up a certain amount
of control over the process,
but we think the majority case,
people will just simply turn
it on and forget about it.
And from then on,
their controls will just work.
We're really proud of this API because
it is definitely the longest function
name in the entire Mac OS API.
We worked really hard
to put that in there.
So, idle controls.
[Transcript missing]
It's basically one of these
Carbon event driven things,
for the most part.
If you need to add support
for it in your control,
you need to add a Carbon event
handler and we'll tell you when
to do the scroll to here thing.
Now of course,
like the rest of the Carbon event
support in control definitions,
we have a shim for the old messages,
but there are some conditions
under which we can't do the
shim translation sort of thing.
The way to stay out of the situation
where we can't support scroll to
here for your scroll bars or sliders,
the simplest way anyway,
is to instantiate the
live controlling variant,
excuse me, the live tracking variants.
Another way to do it is if you,
for some reason,
need to have non-live tracking variants,
specify no action proc for
those scroll bars or sliders.
Really what you need to stay
away from is Dry Gray Region UPP.
And that's a weird historical sort of...
I don't want to call it an accident,
but basically it's, once again,
it's one of those weird
overloaded semantic cases where
sometimes you specify an action
proc with a certain prototype,
and sometimes you specify an
action proc with another prototype,
and it's really hard for the
Carbon Event shim to figure
out which situation you're in.
So basically,
it eliminates the possibility that
it will try to call a function with
the incorrect prototype by simply
establishing conditions under which it
won't even try to do scroll to here.
So if you stay away from those situations
where it's a possibility that you would
have to specify drag-ray region UPP,
then basically you don't have to
worry too much about scroll to here,
it'll just work.
Click activation is a whole
new facility we've added.
Basically,
click activation is a way for a control
to specify what kind of behavior it
wants when it's been clicked on and
the window it's in is not active.
And again,
an active window is basically any window
that the user expects to interact with.
And there are four cases that a
control can specify-- or I should
say four behaviors that a control
can specify for the situation.
I think the names are
pretty straightforward.
Control basically either wants
the window to be activated or not,
and it wants the control
to actually be hit or not.
And then you can specify all
the combinations thereof.
And so basically your application,
when it detects a click
in an inactive window,
it can call getControlClickActivation
and then find out what
to do next as a result.
I believe the control which supports
getControlClickActivation is the
Data Browser control right now,
but in the future there may be more
controls which actually care about this.
So if you're building
framework type of code,
you probably want to use
getControlClickActivation in the
general case and not just avoid it just
because you don't use Data Browser.
So here's a chunk of sample
code that shows get control
click activation in action.
The first if case is basically,
if the window is active,
do what you always did.
Do what you're doing now.
No change is necessary.
But if the window is not active,
then get control click
activation comes into play.
And that, basically, after you find out
what the control wants,
you can figure out whether
you need to select the window.
So if the control is
saying activate the window,
then you just call select window.
And if the control is saying
that it wants to handle a click,
then again, you just call the same old
code that you've always had
to handle clicks and controls,
and it should work just fine.
So I've given you a long
laundry list of features we've
been adding to the toolbox,
and I want to go back
over some of them to
I want to emphasize what's in store
for you in the next few weeks or a
few months or hopefully a few days.
Basically,
drawing to the Window Manager Port is
no longer supported.
It's kind of doable in DP4,
but don't get used to that
idea because it's going to
stop being possible very soon.
There's some changes to the custom
window and control definition model.
There's not only changes to the
way you need to instantiate them,
but also changes to the way
they need to work internally.
And then of course there's the dialog
item list accessors that we've added
in order to support dialog opacity.
Then there's the Unicode support,
pervasive in the toolbox.
Unicode is obviously an
important future direction.
There's the Carbon Events support
in the toolbox,
and once again I want to emphasize,
if you get a chance to see sessions
121 and 122 on QuickTime streaming
or videotape or however it is they
end up distributing these things,
definitely take that chance.
And then we've added a bunch of
new Control Manager features,
some to support the Aqua user experience
and some just because they were cool.